---
layout: post
title: Authoring Text Adventures in TADS 3
tags: [GameDev, Writing]
permalink: /if/talk/
img: https://cmu.box.com/shared/static/xs7hs5urbtyusm5940zq4ee4e6u88yo1.gif
link: http://github.com/evan-erdos/if-template
---

Hello, everyone, and welcome to
(trail off) (crumple up notes) (improvise)


---

### Introduction ###

I'm giving a talk!
If you want to follow along during the talk, you'll need a few things.

To start writing text adventures, you'll need to:

- install [TADS 3][] with your favourite package manager
- no package manager, huh? Ok, get it from the [TADS][] site
- if you don't even know what a package manager is:
    - you're probably an OS X user
    - and you should use the installer:
        - [OS X Installer][] *(3.7MB download)*
- if you don't have a bash emulator on your DOS machine:
    - you aught to think about why you're even using Windows
    - now that you're done thinking, consider getting Workbench:
        - [Workbench][] *(18MB download)*


---

Now, you're ready for my talk!
You're ready to begin writing your own text adventure!

Well, almost.

The sample project is on [GitHub][], but can also be downloaded here:

- [IF-Template][] *(v1.0.0, 37kB)*

Now you're ready!

---


#### What are Text Adventures? ####

* they're like little books, inside your computer

* key differences:
    * you can't read a book and lose
    * books don't run from your command line

* they have been around almost forever
    * *Adventure* was written circa 1975...
    * ...in Fortran for the PDP-10

---


#### How are they different from Interactive Fiction? ####

* they are not really
    * both display text
    * both use text as user input

* key differences:
    * IF can include things like interactive narratives
    * Text Adventures tend to be "adventurey"
    * IF doesn't need to have swords, lamps, or goblins
    * Text Adventures are required to have all three
    * IF might be considered more *avant-garde*

---


#### What are some of your favourites, Ben? ####

* oh, how kind of you to ask!

* my favourite is *[Vespers][]*
    * written by Jason Devlin
    * Set in a monastery during the plague
    * deals with the themes of faith, death
    * mostly horrifying

* my second favourite is *[A Change in the Weather][]*
    * written by CMU Alum Andrew Plotkin
    * a wonderful, short, and difficult story
    * contrasts intrinsic / extrinsic values
    * less horrifying

[Vespers]: <http://iplayif.com/?story=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ifarchive.org%2Fif-archive%2Fgames%2Fzcode%2Fvespers.z8>
[A Change in the Weather]: <http://iplayif.com/?story=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ifarchive.org%2Fif-archive%2Fgames%2Fzcode%2Fweather.z5>

---


#### Can I write a Text Adventure and become rich and famous? ####

* No! Nobody does that.

---


#### How can I get started with this, and become rich and famous? ####

* again, this won't make you rich or famous

* but now that you ask, yeah, we can get started writing

---


#### How does the syntax work, and will it make me rich and famous? ####

* this won't make you rich or famous

* but, since you asked, there are a few things that can snag you:
    * string literals are hard
    * some are like `"bleh I'm a string literal"`
    * others are like `'urggh, me too'`
    * some are even like `""" And then I said, "What?" """`
    * or like, `''' I can't even believe it. '''`

* semicolons can be *traumatizing*
    * they can be used as block delimiters
    * you can put them at the end of things
    * please use `{` and `}` for any complex objects
    * the `;` is acceptable for really simple stuff

* the `+` operator works in mysterious ways
    * it's used for establishing hierarchy among objects
    * using a `+` will make whatever is defined before it the "parent"
    * for example, you can define an object like below:

~~~javascript
room : Room {
    desc = "Look, a room!";
}

+ table : Surface, Fixture
'desk/table/surface' 'table'
"""
Wow, what a table we have here.
It's plainly amazing, and also in the room.
""";
~~~

---


#### Has it been an hour yet, and can you make me rich and famous? ####

* probably not

* also, no

---


#### Now that I know how to write words, with my hands... ####

* do you want to know what makes a really good text adventure?

* do you want to know how to write beautiful prose?

* do you want to become rich and famous?

---


#### How do write beautiful prose? ####

* don't make mistakes like that, try "How do I"

* learn a bunch of fancy words

* profit

---


#### How do I actually write beautiful prose? ####

* so, as I found out recently, it takes more than that

* writing good requires more setup

---


#### The Hope / Fear Cycle ####

* good writing relies on this
	* it keeps readers / players engaged
	* constantly misplace their expectations
	* profit

* it can be overdone (Lookin' at you, Shonda)
	* "Oh, another plane crash and murder, great"
	* "Why does this keep happening to me?"
	* can cause writing to become unrealistic

---


#### Different sorts of plot ####

* keep track of Objective Plot
    * physical progress of the protagonists
    * Indiana Jones gets the idol
    * Indiana Jones loses the idol
    * he gets it back again
    * now he's going after the Arc of the Covenant
    * he loses the Arc
    * he gets it back again

* keep track of the Subjective Plot
    * Indiana Jones threatens to destroy the Arc
    * René Belloq knows he can't blow up the Arc
    * Indiana Jones can't go through with it because he loves it
    * René Belloq's fatal flaw kills him in the end!

* subjective plots are much harder to pin down

---


#### Compelling Characters ####

* keep track of their strengths and motivations
    * if a character doesn't have clear motivations, things fall apart
    * an audience will know when you're just making it up

* give them extremely exploitable flaws
    * everyone knows what to do with a greedy villain
    * Indiana & Belloq mirror each other

* characters are no more than tools to push plot forward

---


#### You can write more than anyone wants to read ####

* this is why fan fiction is awful

* fan fiction is almost pure *phlebotinum*
    * thank Joss Whedon for this disgusting word
    * it refers to writing which is all fluff
    * the actual intrigue of writing is usually not the tech
    * Star Wars is a good example

* I can regale you with magniloquent poesy all day

---


#### Does this apply to Interactive Fiction? ####

* yes

---


#### What makes a really good Text Adventure? ####

* plot
* characters
* motivation to make content for a talk
* ...

---


#### So, let's jump right in! ####

It's audience suggestion time!

What do we want with respect to the plot?

* Some more plot!
* Murderous rodents!
* Time Travel-as-a-service

What do we want as the setting?

* Big
* Dark and Claustrophobic
* Room-sized

---


[TADS]: <http://www.tads.org/tads3.htm>
[TADS 3]: <http://tads.org>
[FrobTADS]: <http://www.tads.org/frobtads.htm>
[OS X Installer]: <http://www.tads.org/frobtads/FrobTADS-1.2.3.dmg>
[Workbench]: <http://www.tads.org/t3dl/t3setupd.exe>
[GitHub]: <http://github.com/evan-erdos/if-template>
[IF-Template]: <https://github.com/evan-erdos/if-template/archive/v1.0.1.zip>


